Interviewer: Thank you very much and have a to this special lunchtime edition of the Harvard Business Leadership Breakfast Series. My name is Tim Dodson of Morris Manning and Martin. I won't take too much time telling you about upcoming events since there are flyers at all of your tables, but I will mention our next breakfast event, our next Leadership Breakfast. On Thursday, January 25th, we'll welcome Chris Womack, President and CEO of The Southern Company. To serve its nine million customers, the Southern Company draws on diverse energy sources, including, of course, electricity and natural gas, but also solar, wind, nuclear, battery storage, microgrids, and other sustainable sources. Mark your calendars for that event and the rest of our terrific lineup. Details and registration for all events appears online, www.hbs-atlanta.org. Before we get started in earnest, I'd like to acknowledge and thank our sponsors for making this program possible. First of all, special event sponsor, ICV Partners. Founded in 1999, ICV Partners is a leading private equity firm that's supports management leaders with strong lower middle market companies in pursuing growth. To date, ICV has invested in 31 companies in over 50 add-on acquisitions, and on a cumulative basis, including co-investments, manages over $1.8 billion. ICV also has strong ties to Harvard Business School. Seven of its 10 managing partners are HBS graduates, so thank you to ICB. We would also like to thank our season-long sponsors, Acadia Associates, executive search and transition consultant. First Horizon, driven by shared commitments to its clients, associates, and the communities they serve. Delta Airlines, the world's most admired and we're going to be talking about of ICB's Atlanta office. Prior to joining ICB, Mr. Moreland was Managing Director and Group Head of the Financial Sponsors Group at a regional investment bank where he oversaw the firm's investment banking and leveraged finance efforts with private equity firms. Before that, Mr. Moreland was a Managing Director at Bank of America Securities, providing capital raising and mergers and acquisitions advice to a mid-sized companies. Mr. Moreland has served on and continues to serve on a host of non-profit boards including the boards of the Latin School of Chicago and Children's Health Care of Atlanta Foundation. Mr. Moreland is a native of Atlanta, holds a bachelor's in accounting from Morehouse College and a master's in business administration from the University of Chicago. So please welcome Ira Moreland. 

Moreland: Good afternoon. Thank you for the introduction, and I have the pleasure of introducing our speaker this afternoon, and when I got the call from Ed Charter asking if ICV wanted to sponsor this, it was a no brainer for a lot of reasons that I'll talk about. We sort of share in our DNA concern for underserved, and I don't tell this story often, but I'll just sort of mention it in passing here because I think it's appropriate. As was said, most of my colleagues went to HBS. I have to remind them that Chicago is the number one business school all the time. But nonetheless, at HBS, our managing partner, Willie Woods, was taking a class from Dr. Michael Porter, who I'm sure most people in this room certainly are aware of, and he was in business school during the early 1990s when the Rodney King episodes took place, and we all know how Dr. Porter has these structures, competitive structures, competitive analysis, and, you know, a competitive environment, competitive countries, and Willie thought, you know, what if we use that sort of construct to go into some cities and see how we can create an ecosystem where everybody can participate in the relative strengths of that community, and so Willie did that, we did it in Los Angeles, and from that Dr. Porter started a not-for-profit that exists to this day called the Initiative for Competitive Intercity, ICIC, and out of ICIC grew the idea of ICV Partners, and it was our goal to get into private equity and to demonstrate that in an industry where there was not very much diversity, that diversity could be a strength to the investment ecosystem and I think we've proven that over our 20 years. I was told that I should keep my remarks brief and so I had to do away with my 20 page comments here, so I'm going to try to cut to the chase, because we're all here to hear from our Fed President here in Atlanta, Dr. Raphael W. Bostic, and I could take another half an hour and go through his many accomplishments, which I won't do. I think all of us are mostly aware of all the -- that he's accomplished academically and professionally. He certainly is noteworthy that he is a Harvard undergrad, he's Chicago PhD, he's worked in various administrations, he's worked for HUD, he worked for the Fed early in his career, he's a noted economist. But through all of that, he's really focused on income gap, housing disparities, access to credit, things that will help drive the overall economy and make our country a better place. So I'm just going to stop there so we can hear the man of the hour, and we're very proud of him. We're proud to sponsor this event with him as speaker, and we thank you all for being here, and with that, Dr. Raphael Bostic. 

Interviewer: President Bostic, I understand you wanted to say something before we get started. 

Bostic: Yeah, so good afternoon everyone. It's really good to be here. I wanted to go to some level setting because, you know, we're all Harvard alum. Harvard's been in news a lot recently, and I'm not here as a Harvard representative. I'm here as a first-year president, so in that capacity I'm not going to speak to any of those issues I've had opportunity to do that in my role as an overseer in other settings. This is not one of those settings. So I just want to say that right off the bat. There's a lot of other stuff we're going to be able to talk about, and I'm hoping you have lots of questions on that. But I did just want to put that out there just so that we all are starting from the right place. All right, Tim, back to you. 

Interviewer: Okay. First though, a little about your career path. You jointly majored in psychology and economics before earning a doctorate in economics from Stanford. Given the role of human psychology and economic decision making, that all makes perfect sense. But was that your plan from the outset? 

Bostic: No, no. So, you know, when I was an undergrad, I was going to be a chemical engineer. So I was in Chem 10. It's a crazy class, and the people there were far more intense than I was ready for. So, at the end of that semester, I was like, "Get me out of here. Let me find something else to do." I wound up taking a psychology class and really loved it. But then... you know, a thing that almost all undergrads do is take EC10, and I really liked it. So I just started taking classes that I liked. There was no grand plan, there was no kind of big picture thing, and then at some point I just had enough credits to be able to get a combined major. So I did a dissertation, loved it, and then, you know, Cypress always the first love. But the econ, I really enjoyed that as well, and so the stuff I worked on was really about how do people make decisions under uncertainty, like how do they reveal their preferences and make choices in the world where things are not always so certain, and it turns out they mess up all the time. But they mess up in very systematic ways and if you understand those ways then it positions you better to be able to anticipate sort of how a group or individuals will respond to something but also it can get you to think about well how can we set up in institutions and incentives to have people position themselves to be their best selves and so you know in this role I've spent a lot of time thinking about those things. You know, Ira, you talked about the origins of ICV. One of our taglines is an economy that works for everyone. We are trying to make sure that the American economy is one that every person who's in it has an opportunity to be their most productive self doing the things that they aspire to so they can be their maximum impact on society. So we are all in this together and it's really been one of the great privileges to be in this role. 

Interviewer: As I mentioned you launched your career at the Fed Board of Governors in the 1990s before embarking on successful stints in public policy and academia. What led you to return to the Fed and how has it changed in 15-20 years? 

Bostic: Well, they all find the job right so so for me. I was I was a happy professor out in Los Angeles and had a nice little research lab eight graduate students, a ton of folks are doing great stuff, and I got a call to say that there is this interesting opportunity in Atlanta. I'm like, this could be a really interesting thing. So I applied thinking there's no chance I'll get the job, but then I got it. So I was like, okay, I guess I'll do this thing and we'll kind of see how it goes. What I would say is, when I started at the board of governors in DC, like it was the first era of like PCs, right? So everything was on mainframes. It was really a different world. The notion of data, the notion of analytics, the notion of how the Fed engaged with folks was totally different. In those days, they didn't do press conferences. They didn't even do the statement that came out when with the FOMC decision. The decision just happened, and then people in the markets would just start to see the Fed starting to do something. They must have made a decision. Like, that was how things were revealed. So, the way we are today is far different. The information, there was no CNBC or Bloomberg or any of that kind of stuff. You didn't have the kinds of intense coverage and scrutiny as before. But then we also didn't have as many opportunities to be out and just talk to folks and let them know kind of how we're thinking about the world, what we're seeing, so that we all are kind of on the same page together. It's a very different thing. I actually like this a lot better in the sense that there's an opportunity for the mystery and the shroud to be removed so that people can actually know what we're doing. What we're thinking about, what we're caring about, and have a sense as the world is happening, what sorts of things are going to inform our decision making and my decision making as I think about what the appropriate path of policy is. 

Interviewer: Your fourth quarter message on the Atlanta Fed website. You compared recent economic signals to a Rorschach plot. But noted at the same time that in your view the outlook is becoming clear. So how do you see the economy and how do you see it evolving over the next few months? 

Bostic: Well, let me start by saying I hope you all are subscribed to the Atlanta Fed list serve. I'm seeing some, not every hand is going up. So, we have a form, a little brochure in the middle of every table. If you're not subscribed, take one, that will allow you to be on this. We started a little while ago with me doing a quarterly message, and that quarterly message sort of gives a snapshot of how I'm seeing things moving forward. There's a lot of other stuff on our website as well, a lot of tools. So we have an inflation, underlying inflation dashboard. You may have heard about the Atlanta Fed Wage Tracker. We also have something called GDP Now, which is a now-cast predicting where GDP is likely to go. These are all fully transparent. They're out there for anyone to use, and I would encourage all of you to do that. These are some of the ways that we think about. Trying to be clear and help people understand where things are. So you guys, so that's the end of the commercial, all right, so I'll just let the commercials over. But yes, Outlook for the Economy. So, you know, we've come quite a long way. So, when I think about where we are, when we started with the pandemic, we are still in many regards the pandemic economy. Everything that we're dealing with today is a byproduct of the virus happening. Our initial response to the virus and then the policy response moving forward and then all the things that we learned as we were living through the pandemic. All the most we can work from home or you know I can just do whatever I want. I might revisit my thinking about how I'm attached to the labor market. What kind of jobs should I be thinking about as opportunities and options as many industries have gone far more national or even global than they were before. There's been a lot of fundamental changes that have happened and what we're seeing today has a lot of that as the drivers of where we are. So, the economy has had a lot of momentum for quite some time. Right after the pandemic hit, there was a big question about, would all small businesses fail? How many jobs would we lose? Would they ever come back? And what happened, pretty remarkably, GDP rebounded and got back on trend very quickly. Labor markets took a little while longer, but eventually got back on trend as well, and then the economy has been quite strong in the face of a lot of challenges and that strength meant that there was a lot of demand for product. But you'll remember in the in the pandemic we had all those supply chain disruptions, and so demand goes up. Supply doesn't move. That's overpressure on prices. Inflation goes up and we've been at the Fed dealing with that ever since. So we knew we had the inflation back down to 2%. That's been a forecast and an objective for us for quite some time, and to be frank, we've made good progress on that. Our preferred measure, the PC measure, I think, topped out at like 7%. CPI topped out at 9%, 9.5%. Both of those are now in the 3% range, but our target is 2, and so pre-pandemic, we were at 1.6, and there was a lot of consternation because we weren't at 2. Today, we're at 3.5. If we had consternation before, we should have a whole lot more now. So even though we've come a long way, there's still a ways to go. To me that that's sort of the context that I think about where our policy is. Now we've got we've made tremendous progress but inflation is still too high and so we have to continue to work to get inflation back down to that 2% level. Now the other side to this because we have a dual mandate is the employment side and typically historically what's happened is that as the pandemic, well, as the Fed starts raising rates and the employment sector takes a hit, and that by and large has not happened this time. I think it's in part because of the pandemic policies that have left families and businesses in a far stronger position than they typically are at this stage in an economic cycle, and so they've been able to absorb a lot of the restrictiveness as we started to get demand and supply it back into balance, and that's really what's continued to happen as we move forward. So my outlook is for the process that we've had to continue. Inflation will continue to come down slowly and sort of unevenly. And I'm anticipating the labor market will continue to slow down as well. Everyone here knows labor market's been super tight, right? The hyper dependent, it was hard to hire anyone. You didn't want to lose a worker because you were not sure when you'd be able to get another one back. Things have backed off and eased from that a little bit, but not a whole lot, right? And if you recall right before the pandemic, unemployment rates were 3.5, 3.6, somewhere in that area, which was unprecedented. People thought that was actually not possible to have, and we were not getting inflation there. So we have been living in tight labor markets for quite a long time. I'm expecting that will likely continue moving forward. Recession is not in my outlook, but we'll just have to keep our eye open as we move forward. But by and large, this economy is far stronger than I would have imagined it would be 12 months ago, and I'm really grateful for that. It's been a really tremendous development. 

Interviewer: You mentioned keeping an eye out for it. What are the critical indicators you're watching right now in formulating your monetary policy? 

Bostic: So that's a good question. On some level, I look at everything. So there's nothing that I don't pay attention to. But I think for me, in terms of getting glimpses of where the future is likely to go, there are really three things I'm looking at, and they really deal with the two sides of our mandate. So inflation is too high. We've got to get it down to 2%. The thing I'm looking at there is what's inflation telling us? And so you can calculate inflation over multiple horizons. We look at an annual horizon, but you can do it over three months, six months. You can do it one month. You can do it three days if you wanted to. Those shorter run horizons give us a sense of what price additions are going to go into the annual eventually, right? So if your annual's at a level and your three and six months are lower, that's likely a sign that your annual's eventually gonna go lower, right? So I've been paying a lot of attention to what's happening in the three month, what's happening in the six month, because those are the things that are gonna ultimately be the true contributors to overall inflation, and what you see with those is that by and large, they have been lower than where our headline numbers have been, both in terms of just about any measure you want to look at, and they've been coming down pretty strong. That's been quite positive. Another thing I've been looking at is wages. So wages typically, when you hear people talk about wages, they talk about them as inputs to labor and if wages go up then employers need to charge a higher price to cover the cost. I actually think it's worked out a little differently in this period. You know when we were talking to businesses and we asked them, "So why are you raising wages so much?" They're like, "Well, because inflation went up a lot." and our workers know they're behind, and we gotta catch up, or they're gonna go somewhere else to work, right? And so what wages for me has, over this episode, really been a trailing indicator, and has been a catch-up sort of tool or device to get workers to be happy where they are and content where they are. So wages were behind deflation for a while. Today, that's flipped so that wage growth is faster than inflation. So workers are starting to catch up. We want to see that continue, that catch up has got to continue in the long run. You know, wage growth is usually about one, one and a half percentage points higher than inflation, and so getting back to that steady state will be useful. So seeing wages, the wage growth fall but not fall so much as to there's not real wage growth is going to be something also that I'd be looking for. The wage growth tracker that I mentioned earlier is a useful tool in that regard, and then the third thing is really the flip side, so of economic output. So, output can be too strong, but it can also be too weak, and so we got to always be keeping an eye on. I'm going to always be keeping an eye out to make sure that it hasn't gotten too weak. So the question I ask people all the time and maybe I should just do this right now. So how many of you are planning to lay off anybody in the next three months? I got one hand in the back. All right. So that is pretty much what I hear right now whenever I go anywhere. Right. Businesses and employers still see the economy as quite strong. Demand is expected to be robust. Most folks that I talk to say is it's going to be strong not as strong as it was two years ago. Two years ago was record breaking right in terms of revenues and profits but still not that far off of it to where. we should be worrying. My job now is just make sure we stay in that space. If things start to weaken rapidly, that's going to be a sign that the momentum is really coming off it. We've got to be careful because my goal is really to position our policy to minimize the amount of pain that folks have to go through. We're in a fairly good place now. You can see a pathway to having very little pain. Over this period, the unemployment rate still hasn't exceeded 4%, and just for context, when I started, the full employment level of unemployment, that's sort of, and everything's steady state, was the lowest you could do was like 4.4% and we have not gotten to four yet. It's a remarkable environment that we're in and I'm hopeful that that can continue. These are long answers, I'm sorry, but my team always tells me not to talk to them too much. 

Interviewer: Not at all, give advice in your public segments you've advised with patience and caution in calibrating monetary policy and have said that current monetary policy is sufficiently restricted. Could you elaborate on that and when do you think rates might fall? 

Bostic: So you've actually read these things. You're using my own language back at me. Yeah, so I did say those things. To me... You can see it, I can see it, so we do post my speeches and all that kind of stuff, so you can actually see all this stuff. So look, I think we needed to get policy to be in a restrictive stance, and we needed to make sure that we were not contributing to that imbalance between demand and supply, and by going into restrictive stance... that's going to be a drag on demand and pull it closer to supply and get us to a place where we're going to start to see those pressures dissipate. I talk to a lot of businesses and we have a data collection or information collection, a mechanism that we call the Regional Economic Information Network. So over the course of, those folks get paid basically to go have one-on-one unstructured conversations with executives, and we asked them, "How's it going? Are you going to hire people? How's demand? I'm having problems getting inputs to your product. You know, what are you, like all those sort of questions, how are you going to raise prices?" And what we heard through much of the first two years of the pandemic, was we're going to raise prices and we can just raise them. People are not sensitive, they don't respond to it. Whatever we raise it 20% they'll show up, they'll take things off the shelves. But as we got further into the pandemic we started hearing less and less and less of that. Workers, families were all becoming much more sensitive and there was a point where it's switched, and we heard from a majority of our businesses like they don't have any pricing power anymore, and once you start to see that, that's a sign that the restrictiveness is really starting to bite, right? And that bite means that we can just let this go, particularly because we saw a supplier responding, and so if this is the gap, you know, some of it can come at the expense of some. on the demand side. But if some of it's coming back on the supply, then let's let the supply keep going. Let the supply do the work for us, and by and large, we got to a place where I thought that we were sufficiently restrictive. Supply was doing work for us, and we just need to let time happen, and that time would then get us to a place where... that the dynamic would be such that inflation would come down and I thought that there was enough momentum in the economy that we could get that inflation coming down without seeing a two or three percentage point spike in unemployment, and by and large, I've been fortunate that that's how it's played out. There's still a ton of uncertainty, right, so things happen. But two years ago I thought we were in a very similar place and then we had the Russian invasion of Ukraine which disrupted energy markets, put those prices out of into like high levels, disrupted food markets and so things can always happen. So that's another reason why, you know, I said cautious, patient, because you never know when something else can happen. But we're just gonna let this go. Another word that I often use is resolute, because a resolute means we have to be like cautious with resolute means we're not gonna jump at the first data point, right? We're going to let things happen, be sure that trends are actually trends. Now one of the imagery I've been using, so everyone in sort of early math classes, you got a bunch of data and they said like tease out where the line is, right? Find the slope and all that kind of stuff. When you look at those pictures, very few of the points are actually on the line, right? Some are going to be above, some are going to be below. So if you see a point that is actually not on your line, what are you supposed to do with that? Now, there's an impulse to actually be active and responsive, and in this environment, I think it's in our interest to be cautious and patient to make sure that the next two points don't just pull you back to line and the line doesn't change very much, and so that's the sort of thing that I'm trying to make sure that I understand where the economy is. You're going to get this bouncing around, but is that bouncing fundamentally changing where the line is? And if the answer is no, then we're good, we need to stay there. If the answer is yes, then we have to start to think about sort of what a response should look like. To date, over the last year, the line has been pretty straight. The point still bounced around. GDP came in at 5.2 in the third quarter. Retail sales are coming stronger here and there. But by and large, our line on inflation has been consistent and in the right direction. I want to make sure that it stays that way. 

Interviewer: Turning to the labor market. Is it still tight? Do you think a labor shortage is likely to be with us for a while? 

Bostic: So yeah, labor markets are definitely tight. They're not at the historically tight levels that we had in the pandemic. So you remember in the pandemic, we had a ton of early retirements, we had a lot of childcare issues. pSo people have been pulling themselves out, and by and large, that stuff has resolved itself. But it was tight before the pandemic. So resolving it doesn't mean you're going back, you're going from tight back to tight, and that's kind of where we are. One thing that's been interesting, like immigration rates have returned back to their normal level. That's a pressure valve that you can use to start to see, like ease off the difficulties of hiring, and so we're gonna just have to track all of these things. The one thing for me that has been gratified, spoken to this a little bit, is that even with the tight labor markets, we have not seen big spikes in wage growth, and in fact, the trend in wage growth is moving in the opposite direction. To me, that's a positive thing, and that's something I'm gonna continue to watch. Can I just say one other thing on this? So, you answered, are we gonna be permanent, right? And maybe, I think, is the right answer. But what's also happened, which has been quite interesting, is that employers are responding to this. Right? And introducing automation and other sort of technology so they can get the same amount of products with a smaller number of people. So just, just, how many people here have been in a restaurant where they've used a robot to deliver the food? Right. That did not exist four years ago, by and large. These are responses to the labor markets, and it's those sort of things that actually put a little less pressure on wages and other things, because this technology is actually acting as the release of that pressure. I've talked to folks in manufacturing and a whole host of other things, places. I'm hearing more and more of that and so our tight labor market can actually sustain economic growth to the extent of that continues. 

Interviewer: It seems like the overall tenor of your talk has been positive outlook. By many measures, unemployment, inflation, the stock market economy strong. Yet, according to a prominent recent poll, only 23% of Americans believe the country is headed in the right direction. As New York Times commentator Stephen Ratner posed, "If the economy is so good, why are Americans so..." 

Bostic: You know, I get this question, because I'm the psych major, right? So you know, I think you set me up to, like, I, like, you, you... know psychology so I wanted to answer this question. I actually think that there are a couple of things going on here. So the first is that, you know, for many products, prices are higher than they were three years ago. Noticeably higher, and even with the decline in inflation, that just means it's going up at a slower rate. It doesn't mean is coming now. So when you go to the grocery store or when you go to Walmart or Target, you see higher prices and you remember not too long ago you didn't have to spend that amount of money and that doesn't make anyone feel good or make me feel good. So yeah I don't like to go out and I'm cheap. I don't like to spend money I don't have to spend. All right so that I think that's one thing. You know, people will get used to the price levels that kind of happens over time. The second thing is the wage dynamic as well. So when inflation spiked to 7%, wage growth was 3%, that's minus 4%, right? So now people feel like they're falling behind, they know they're falling behind, and that's a good feeling as well. What's happened in the recent period is that wage growth is higher than inflation, so now that catch-up is starting to happen, and hopefully that catch-up will continue such that people feel at some point they're whole again and are starting to actually get ahead of things, and to the extent that that happens, I think you'll start to see the sentiment change in a positive direction. But all of this is, none of this happens in an instantaneously, right? These are all sort of feelings that you have that evolve over time. The shot, the sticker shot, it takes a while for those things to dissipate and you get used to it. So I'm not expecting that change to happen like in three days or something like that. But if the economy continues to proceed as it does, people have jobs, those jobs are paying wages that make them feel like they're getting ahead. People are feeling more confident and comfortable about what their prospects are for long-term If we get all of that, then I think people will not be grumpy about where they are and start to feel pretty excited. 

Interviewer: Maybe one more question and we'll turn it over to the audience. Communications play a big role in monetary policy. Can you sum up your thinking about communications as a policy tool, including the messages you and your colleagues send to the financial markets and the public. 

Bostic: So, um, so many thoughts, I'm trying to organize them, so very, very, very baseline level. I feel like most Americans don't really understand what the Fed does. why the Fed does the things that it does. I think that is not in our collective interest. So for me, I think there's value in us trying to get out, talk to people in ways that they actually understand, and leave with a better and richer understanding of the things that we care about, the things that we're focused on, and have some idea about Like if something happens, what are like the responses is to be so. So I think that's really important, and the more people who have that understanding, I think the better off we are collectively. You know, they got fit watches that like that set of folks, they're always going to know. But that's not most of America, and to the extent that we can get more of America savvy on these things, I think that's better. Another thing that's actually been quite interesting is that the markets and financial markets in particular, their response functions to information about us has actually accelerated. It's much faster than it used to be. So at the very beginning pandemic, well when the inflation went up and then we see we were going to move. I think after our first move, 25 basis points, mortgage rates went from three to seven. Right? We moved 25 and moved 400. Right? That kind of responsiveness was not something that you saw historically, and that's a new thing, and it actually might suggest that the transmission of our policy happens faster. All right, and so if that happens faster than maybe we need to do less over time depending on how things shake out. You have to see the flip side in the last week right we did zero and mortgage rate dropped by 125 basis points right zero minus 125, right? In anticipation of something that to be honest I've never said I was looking to cut rates anytime soon but the markets are starting to feel these things and that responsiveness is actually uh interesting and you know we'll have to just watch how this plays out in a lot of instances the world operates in a symmetric way. So how things go up is how they go down. Economics often doesn't work that way. So you can go up at one kind of pacing, and you can go down a whole different type of pacing. So as we start to see this economy move forward, it'll be actually interesting to see what the responsiveness is as more information comes out about where our policy is likely to go. This has actually been a historic time. I think there's going to be an econ textbook, a chapter called pandemic economics, where all the rules, they just were different, and they played out in ways that made it hard to use our historical models, and it actually put much more of a premium on the information we were getting from our RAINN associates or regional economists, regional executives, I mess up acronyms all the time, but because they were getting on-the-ground information in real time and we were trying to aggregate this enough to tell a story about what's happening today. All the data that you look at last quarter, this last month, is always backward looking, doesn't always give you those sight lines into the future. In a pandemic world where the models are all, you know, they're gonna be messed up, that stuff is actually gonna be more important. 

Interviewer: Shall we open it up to questions from the crowd? 

Question: Thank you for being here. It's fun to listen to you. The federal debt, it's been accelerating, but we've been talking about it and worrying about it for as long as I can remember. Do you think we're headed to some crisis, or is it we'll just keep adapting to it item infinitum and it'll never matter how big the debt is.

Bostic: All right so I'm of two minds so first I say the chair has spoken on this chair Powell has talked about this and he has said that these running deficits like this for a longer time is not sustainable. Right now that's the statement. I would say it's hard to know with by rule whether more debt or less debt is a sign of a problem. So when I was a professor USC I used to ask folks so at the time Russia had no debt and the US had a lot of debt. I had every person that's what you rather invest in Russia or the US? Like, where is the place you'd want to place your money? Right? And so debt is a, and most of them said the US, so debt is a factor that you have to think about, but it's not the only one. Another thing I would say on debt is people use debt all the time. whether it's a good idea or a bad idea is what you use it on and what you get for it. Alright so if you use your debt, I bought my first house, I went in debt. I think that was a good decision and it was like my mortgage was bigger than I wanted it to be, I'll just say that too, but it was okay. So a lot of it also depends on what you're doing with it. I think policy makers, this is something that they will be wrestling with over the next several years. Interest rates have been low and so the debt hasn't had the same impact in terms of trade-offs at the budget level. Those trade-offs are going to be much more acute as we start to have more and more debt service and they're going to have to make decisions so you know. It's an issue that is looming, and it is likely to get larger. 

Question: There is a democratic narrative by economics that the economy is good, inflation's down, employment's up. There's also a competing Republican narrative that the economy is terrible, that prices are up, and inflation is up, etc. Which of those narratives is more consistent with your line of thinking, or do you endorse any of those, either the Democratic or the Republican narrative? 

Bostic: So inflation is up. That's true. Inflation is high. It's too high. We need to get a 2 percent. Employment is tight. It's high. It's at historic levels. That's also good. Right, and that's good, and so moving forward, you know, the world is complicated, and for many of the issues and assessments about whether something is good or bad is sort of how do you weight the different factors and a lot of it is how does it reveal itself in your life you know I'm not you don't get into the politics stuff right so my job is to be independent of all that look at where the economy is and figure out how we get inflation at our 2% level and employment at a maximum level, a maximum sustainable level, what I say. We are on the road to making that happen, and when we get there, you know, I will feel like we have satisfied our mandate, so that everyone else can debate about all the other things, right? I just want us to not be in that conversation. So if we can get inflation back to 2%, that'd be better. If we can keep unemployment at 3.5, 3.7, 3.8, that'd be better, and then I'll just turn on the TV like you do and watch them go at it and try and see who's more compelling to the American people. I mean, it's just inherently subjective. 

Question: You keep talking about the 2% mandate. I mean, why not 1% or 3%? Might it change over time? 

Bostic: So I say 2% 'cause that's what it is. So a couple thoughts on this. So one, there's a whole debate that happened on 2% long before I started, and I just inherited that and I'm happy with that. It's a fine target. In the midst of a crisis is not the time to start moving goalposts, right? And so for me, I don't think that this is a time to really start doing those sorts of things that will undermine confidence in sort of what we're doing and how we're approaching, in the view of how we're approaching our job. Now, nothing should be etched in such a firm stone. as to never be movable, right? And so if the world changes such that there's a baseline structural change that means that your steady state level of inflation is higher, then we should move it. If it changes and we get lower, then we should move it. Like, I'm not stuck on that. One of the things that we've introduced starting in 2012, is we write a long-run framework, like it's an articulation of how we go about doing monetary policy, and now we do a review of that every five years or so. The review was supposed to start, I think, last year. We're still in the midst of the crisis. So it's coming. This will be something that we wrestle with and we'll just have to see sort of what the analysis suggests is the right course of action but you know don't know much to think that we're stuck on you're gonna hear me say 2% until we're out of the crisis that doesn't mean I think 2% is some magical number that is the only number you could have but it's the number we had when we started this as a number.

Question: Dorian Nunez, Army Research out of New Orleans, Louisiana, and I flew up here just for this presentation because when the Fed speaks and you have the opportunity, you should at least park your car, if that's all you got to do to come and hear what has to get said. My question is about employment. I think, like the Kerner Commission, that we have two economies, one black, one white, separate and unequal, and so even when people say the unemployment rate is 3.6%, it's really 2.7% for white America, 5.5% for black America. Here in Georgia, it's 2.2% for whites, 5.8% for blacks, which is one of the highest disparities of any state in the country. Since we at Harvard Business School consider ourselves to be problem solvers, and since you're focused on full employment, what can we do as alumni, capitalists, to engage with you and the Fed and your team to at least address it in this district first, and then demonstrate what needs to be done in other districts around the country? 

Bostic: There's a lot in that question. Let me start by saying, you know, the reason we talk about an economy that works for everyone is because we explicitly recognize that the economy is not working for everyone in the same way, and there are these disparities. There are institutional challenges such that people with comparable amounts of inherent talent are not afforded the same opportunities to have that talent impose itself on our economies in our society and we should be worried about that because I'd say I never know who is gonna have the next great idea and it could easily be from someone who's not in a usual suspects place right and so and casting on it widely and broadly to try to find talent wherever it is. To be creative and thinking about how we identify what true talent looks like and then giving people real choices, and so to me that's what I would say. We are trying to do that at our bank. I'm an employer just like everybody else. We're trying to engage neighborhoods and communities that maybe we have not been where we've not drawn people from to make sure they understand that we're an opportunity. We are someone, an employer, that maybe taps into people's expertise, and here, the Metro Atlanta Chamber has an initiative on racial equity where they're encouraging businesses and employers to be creative about like how you're engaging the workforce, where you're doing your ads, are you thoughtful about the ways you might deploy philanthropy and support? And we do a program, we've done a program for several years now, where we've basically adopted a couple of schools from some of the less connected neighborhoods, and we have the kids come in for a summer, and we just do internships with them, we pay them a little money, and we expose them to things they haven't seen before. They have lunch with my board, my board of directors, and I sit down with them, and it is amazing what they do in preparation. One student is like, "I get up two hours before because I want to make sure I make the bus, and I don't miss this and do all that sort of stuff." the most he possibly could out of that experience, and it's incredibly inspiring to see these kids really stretch and try to do more. One other thing I would just say on this is that, and it's to this point that you never know where talent is, you don't even know what it looks like. So I was, Southwire Company here, it's just south of the city. and another company called Tektron in Augusta. They have a program where they engage the local school district, and they try to collect up people that are of a high probability of dropping out, 'cause they're not getting good grades and all this kind of stuff, and they put them on their assembly line. Tektron, they make... golf carts. So all the golf carts in America, like 95% of the golf carts. So they just put them on the line. Southwire, they do a lot with metal wiring and cabling, and what they did was they also said, "Okay, you're not on track to get your diploma, so we're going to have a little classroom here at the plant." And so when you're not working and doing your shift you can just take your classes and then bunch of them finish. None of these students were A students. These were people deemed to be dropouts. It was structure. It was belief. It was trust It was faith was all those things that allow people these young people to sort of center themselves and really start to tap into their own excellence, and so this is where like being creative and trying to find ways to give folks a chance that they may not have had before can yield pretty amazing things, and so so to your all of us this is all of us issue right so we all can be present in this and we're doing it in our bank and it's been a very positive experience for us. 

Question: Thank you for being here. I'd like to pick your brain on the implied rate cuts by the Fed. During the last meeting they implied that there might be several rate cuts next year. It might not necessarily materialize, but I'm curious why do you think they would, you know, you or they would signify that since the economy is still going strong, the inflation is going down, and labor market is tight, do you think that's because if it doesn't happen the economy might slide into recession? 

Bostic: All right, so there's a lot in that one too. So, just as background, so... Every quarter, all of the FOMC participants, that's all 12 presidents and the seven governors in D.C., we're asked to give our projection of where we think inflation is going to be a year from now, where we think unemployment is going to be, where we think GDP is going to be, and then where we think the Fed funds rate is, our interest rate policy rate is called the dot plot because they dot, they just plot all of them, but everyone gets a dot on the chart, and then they compare like this quarter to the next quarter, this year to next year to the year after. So this year we're at about five and a half, five and a quarter to five and a half, and then next year, oh no, and I should also say, all 19 of us do it independently. Right, so this is, I do my best guess on this, my colleagues from Richmond and Cleveland and San Francisco does it, and you see they all do their best. So it is literally just an accounting of what everyone's best guess is. It is not a plan, it is not strategy, it is not that, it's just a collective, crowdsourcing sort of thing, and then what the media typically does is they just say okay what's the median? We're going to take that median as the signal of where the most likely outcome for the future is going to be. All right so I want to couch it like this because it's not a plan, it's not like there's been an active discussion on this. This is just the revelation of 19 people doing something all right and so the median for next year is between two and three cuts of 25 basis points so the estimate is that by the end of next year will be like four and a half four and three-quarters something like that so the question is why. So the backdrop is why and for me I think I think about it so my outlook I put in two cuts for next year I'm projecting them to be in the second half of the year because I think inflation is going to continue to come down but it's going to come down slowly right now if we're going to be at 2% right and we are restrictive and if we wait till we're at 2% and we're at that residual level, we're going to overshoot. So at some point, you've got to start to moderate that down so that the pressure on the downward pressure on inflation slows and eases and hopefully you coast into the 2%. So that's the strategy. I haven't had conversations with any of my colleagues about what the decision rule is going to be for them to want to start that reduction. I know for me I'm thinking inflation is going to come down relatively slowly in the next six months, which means that there's not going to be urgency for us to start to pull off of our restrictive stance. If that's wrong, then I'll have to modify that for you, right? Just because I said something doesn't mean I can never change it, I'm stuck on that forever. But today, with my expectation, that's what I'm hoping for. One last quote on this, which is, "Inflation over the last six months has come down much faster than I expected." So when I did my dot plot in June of last year, I had the end-of-year inflation 50 basis points higher than it is today. Half a percentage point higher than it is today. All right, and so my expectation of where policy was going to be at the end of next year was only one cut lower. Right. Because it's come down faster, I've pulled forward the notion of when we got to start easing off. Right. So anyway, the point being, we're going to let experience guide us. But the idea is we can't wait until we're at 2% to start moving our policy back down into a more neutral stance, or else we will cause more damage in labor markets than we might cause otherwise.

Question: Thank you, and particularly to you and all your colleagues here in Atlanta, but all around the country, because I think what you've done, taken by the FOMC have been extraordinarily helpful, and I just have one question for you. How do you and your colleagues feel about what the federal regulators have done in shutting down a lot of the banking activities in this country? 

Bostic: So it seems like each question gets a little more... So, a couple thoughts. So, one, we are one of those regulators, you know, the Federal Reserve is a bank regulator, and we each, one of our mandates is to make sure that financial institutions operate in a safe and sound way. Another thing I would say is we have to be highly sensitive. to what a risk looks like and be willing to speak to risk. Now in the crisis, the Great Financial Crisis, '08, '09, '10, '12, more banks failed in the 6th District, my district, than anywhere else in the country, and so folks in my building are hypersensitive to the idea, and I've actually told them that's not happening again, right? They're not allowed here. We have not had another one of those things, and so we have got to be talking plainly and directly and frankly with our banking institutions to make sure when we see risk, they know we see risk. When we see problems, they know we see problems, and that we're gonna, we're gonna stop it before it becomes. existential. Now there's a whole bunch of other stuff that has happened because there have been a number of other rules that have been put in place in regulatory environments, some of it coming out of the great financial crisis, some of it coming from other places, which has caused a bit of, it's caused a fair amount of financial activity to migrate out of the the formal banking sector. and into other financial types of institutions, other types of financial institutions, and those are things that we've got to watch out for, and to me, you know, coming out of the great financial crisis, another thing we got charged with was financial stability, like making sure that risks were not emerging in ways that would bring our whole financial system into a risky area or risky position. So we're just trying to monitor those things. But look, I tell people all the time, I like banks. I think banks are important, and because I like them, I need them to be alive tomorrow. So I need to be able to talk to them straight. I need to say, I think it's really important doing these things or else you're going to be at risk or alternatively if you're going to keep doing these things how much extra capital are you holding so that if the bad thing happens you're still going to be a lot smarter. You can take the risk you better have some provisioning for that. The more that we are able to talk with our bankers about that I think the stronger they're going to be. the more impactful they'll be, and the better financial system we will have. So my goal is to make sure they're still able to act, but do it in a way that's safe and sound, and allows them to actually do all the good things that we need them to do. 

Interviewer: President Bostic, I think that's all we have time for, but I can't thank you enough for joining us today. and for also for what you do for our economy and for our alma mater. Thank you all for coming, we will see you next month for more opportunities.