Interviewer: But joining us right now is Chicago Fed Mr. President Austan Goolsbee. Austan, thanks for joining us this morning. 

Goolsbee: Thanks, Steve. It's only Joe that has to call me Mr. President. Please just call me Austan.

Interviewer: I'll get to that. Austan, I wonder if it would be useful just to start off to create a baseline here. How do you explain to folks, how would you explain to the market what you all did on Wednesday? What was the change in policy as you understand it? 

Goolsbee: Well, as you know, I don't speak for the committee, every member of the FOMC just speaks for themselves. I thought that we were voting on that meeting, and we voted not to raise rates. We put out, as we do each quarter, a statement of economic projections, where each of the individual members says what they anticipate the conditions will be over the coming year and beyond so the policy change was no change. We kept the rates where they were. I think we reflected and in my mind I see that the data on inflation which I've highlighted on this program with you Steve, over and over again is the key thing where we've missed on our mandate and the key thing that should drive our decision making is on inflation and we've seen significant improvement on the inflation front bringing us back closer to what looks like to our target and I think that that's reflected in the SEP dots, if you want to think of it that way. 

Interviewer: When you put the word "any" into the statement to talk about additional policy firming or tightening, what is that telling you? Is that telling you that all of a sudden there is no longer a bias to hike, or is there still this bias to hike for the committee? 

Goolsbee: Well, like I say, I don't speak for anybody on the committee. For me, I believe that if we get improvement on inflation, that we're clearly moving to target, and we're still not there yet. We still need to see these markers. But if we get inflation back into the range of our dual mandate goals, then we've got more symmetric concerns, let's call it, about both sides of the dual mandate.

Interviewer: The reason I'm asking this question, Austan, about what happened last week is because I wanna ask you the question about what the market heard, and you guys, it looks like on average, on a median forecast, three rate cuts. Somehow the market heard five or six. You said, I don't know when this is going to happen. The market said for sure in March. How do you react to how the market reacted to what y'all did last week? 

Goolsbee: Well look, I like your phrase, but it's not it's not what you say or what the chair says, it's what do they hear and what do they want to hear. I was confused a bit with the was... market just imputing here's what we want them to be saying. I thought there was seemed to be some confusion about how the FOMC even works. We don't debate specific policies speculatively about the future. We vote on that meeting and we voted at that meeting not to raise rates. We put out an SEP that forecast over next year that the individuals on the FOMC collectively thought conditions are going to not be a recession and inflation is going to be coming down which would allow us to reduce the restrictiveness and it's far be it from me to get into the head of what the market is, I think we'd be best to remember the old Volcker lesson that our job is to act and their job is to react and if we get into one of these circular well let's choose our action based on how we think they're gonna react to us saying what they would I think we're gonna get mixed up.