I'm here at the New York Federal Reserve Bank with New York Fed President John Williams. Continuing a tradition we've had for several years now, will you join us at the end of the year, tell us what happened and tell us what's going to happen. Thanks for joining us, John. Well, welcome back to the New York Fed, Steve. It's great to see you. It's always good to be here. I want to start with the question that I'm getting from a lot of people in the markets and the questions I have myself, which is, what changed between, say, the end of the November when it sounded like you and the chair were both saying hey it wasn't time to talk about rate cuts and then what happened at the meeting where it sounded like the committee was talking about rate cuts and now projecting more of them for next year? Well first of all I we aren't really talking about rate cuts right now we're very focused on the the question in front of us which as chair Powell said the question is have we gotten monetary policy to a sufficiently restrictive stance in order to ensure that inflation comes back down to 2%? That's the question in front of us. That's what we've been really thinking about for the past five months and I think will be continuing to think about for some time. So that's the topic of discussion for the committee. That's a decision we made to hold the Fed Funds Target. it is. Now clearly, you know, we all put in projections for interest rates and inflation and growth and unemployment as well. Those are individuals thinking about what may happen over the next three years on a baseline path, but the discussion really at the FOMC to, you know, right now is about do we have monetary policy today in the right place? speculating on what will happen at some point in the future. But the chair said you had a discussion about rate cuts. Well, you know, we have the projections that we all submit. The summary of those projections are shared with committee participants, and some committee participants talk about their projections, but this is not the topic of discussion about what are we going to do or. plans around this. Again, the committee doesn't have plans around that. This is really each committee participant thinking, okay, over the next three years, if the economy evolves in a certain way, what do you think the appropriate path for interest rates are? So what was the answer to the question, are you sufficiently restrictive? Well, I think in the, you know, this gets to the uncertainties that we face. still a highly uncertain situation, both in terms of inflation, in terms of the progress of the economy. So right now I think the base case, at least I'll speak from my own view, the base case is looking, you know, pretty good. Inflation is coming down, the economy remains strong, and employment is low, and so when you think about how we got in policy to the kind of appropriate place. It's looking like we are at or near that in terms of sufficiently restrictive, but things can change. One thing we've learned even over the past year is that the data can move in surprising ways. We need to be ready to move to tighten policy further if inflation, the progress in inflation were to stall or reverse, and you know the committee is clearly focused on making sure that we bring inflation back down to 2% on a sustained basis. Now we need to be data-dependent and respond to and take the right policy decisions depending on you know what transpires. So the market sure thought you were talking about rate cuts and projecting rate cuts. What do you make of how the market reacted, both in a huge downdraft in bond yields and an updraft in stock prices? Well, you know, the market—one thing that's been really interesting over the past year—you know, we track this, obviously, very closely here at the New York Fed—is the market reactions to all kinds of news, economic data, all types of events, has been much bigger in magnitude, much larger than— is historically normal. I think that reflects in large part the uncertainty, the unusual nature of the situation we face. So, you know, the fact that we're seeing big market reactions to pretty much everything has been a pattern that we've seen over the year. In terms of the, you know, what we're seeing about where the market's saying, well, the, you know, the FOMC is going to do this or this, so many, you know, rate cuts this year, I would just point people back to the economic projections that we put out. If you look at the median projection, over the next three years, the median shows that, basically, gradually over the next three years, the policy restraint that we put in place, being dialed back gradually over three years. That's the view of the committee. I think that's consistent with our view of how the economy is going to evolve. I think the market, in a way, is kind of reacting very strongly, maybe more strongly, than what we are showing in terms of our projections. Do you believe the Federal Reserve can cut interest rates next year? Well, again, of course we can. do whatever is appropriate for achieving our goals. You look at the way I think about this is if we get the progress that I'm hoping to see on inflation on the economy there of course it will be it'll be kind of natural for us to move monetary policy over over extended period of time over a few years back to levels. That has to be in the context of us being confident that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2% goal. That's absolutely essential to see that. But under those conditions, which is my baseline forecast, of course we need to move policy back to normal levels over a period of time. We've got to be data-dependent and able. to adjust according to what we're seeing. When I look at the summary of economic projections, I see that the funds rate is projected to decline almost as much as you project the core PCE to decline. That could be an artifact of just what happens when you average up what 19 people are saying, but it also seems oddly symmetric. Do you see rates coming down? simply to match the decline of inflation next year? - Well, I don't think of monetary policy that simplistically, but of course, one of the kind of principles of monetary policy is to focus on real interest rates, which are nominal interest rates adjusted for inflation. I think about it in terms of the totality of the data, what's happening in terms of our maximum employment mandate, what's happening in terms of inflation, what's the outlook look like and what are the balance of risks. So you know to my mind it's not as simple as that and it's really about all the information that suggests you know over time as the economy hopefully you know moves inflation you know right back to our 2% goal with the economy still strong and the labor market strong it will over time we'll want to get Monte back to more normal levels. I'd have to ask this question more directly. The market sees rates coming down as soon as March. How would you respond to that? I think it's just premature to be even thinking about that question. Right now, the question that we're thinking about it at the FOMC is do we have the level of rates right? As Chair Powell said, you know, there's these of how we've thought about monetary policy, you know, have we got this the the stance of policy sufficiently restricted, and then of course we'll be watching the data to make sure that we're getting that appropriate policy. To me the debate is not, you know, it is premature to really think about like what we will be doing sometime well into the future. That's not the question. in front of us. But that's what markets do, right? I mean, they try to forecast what's going to happen six months down the road, not necessarily three years. So it's not crazy to be thinking, hey, we have—inflation has been under control, as you have suggested, and that—as Governor Waller says, and now you've sort of conceded that if inflation comes down, then the funds rate would come down to what? as restrictive as you've been, or do you have to be quite as restrictive as you've been? Well, Steve, as you said, this is what market participants do, this is what commentators do. What we need to do is focus on our job of achieving maximum employment price stability. That's what we're focused on. We've followed a strategy for the past two years to make sure, first, that we got monetary policy to a restrictive stance. Now, we're very focused on making sure that the stance of policy is getting the job done, and as we watch the data and see how the economy unfolds and how the risks, the balance of risks unfold, we'll decide on what we need to do at that point.