Interviewer: Well, the Federal Reserve making its final policy decision of 2023 last week, choosing to hold interest rates at their 22 year high while forecasting cuts in the new year. Stocks surged on the news of the investors pricing in an aggressive path to rate cuts. Some FOMC members have attempted to push back on this reaction. New York Fed President John Williams saying that they aren't really talking about rate cuts. right now, and Chicago Fed President Austin Goolsbee saying that he's, quote, "confused by the market's reaction," but others validating investor enthusiasm, as San Francisco's Mary Daly saying that cuts could be needed in the year ahead, noting that the Fed should be mindful of over-tightening. Joining us now with another perspective from the FOMC is Yahoo Finance Fed reporter Jennifer Seanberger. 

Jennifer: For more on last week's Fed decision, I want to welcome into the program Richmond Fed President Tom Barkin. Tom, thank you so much for joining me. It's great to have you on the program. 

Barkin: Glad to be with you, Jennifer. 

Jennifer: Looking back to right before the FOMC meeting, the committee seemed quite hawkish. In fact, Chair Powell warned markets not to assume that the Fed was finished raising rates and would soon pivot to rate cuts, yet if we looked at the policy decision last week, the chair seemed to suggest that you have likely reached the peak on rates, and the median projection is for three rate cuts next year. So what happened? Why the pivot? 

Barkin: Inflation has been and rightly been and continues to be our focus, but I think you have to acknowledge that data has come in very nicely. Five of the last six core PCE readings have been arguably around our target. If you look at the recent CPI and PPI data, most forecasters are suggesting that'll happen again this month, and you might even have six month numbers in the range of our target. So we're making good progress on inflation. I think that just makes the case to balance the perspective between both sides of our mandate and inflation and employment, and when you do that, the focus naturally shifts to the question of how are you going to address the rate path over the future, over the coming months and quarters. I guess I should say what I think the chair said in his press conference, which is that the SCP is not forward guidance. It's just a forecast, and so a bunch of individuals put down their forecast. It had a pretty wide range, if you notice it. Based on that forecast, they estimated what would possibly be the number of rate cuts you'd have in the next year. We'll see what happens to the economy over the next year, and I'm sure we'll make our judgment according. 

Jennifer: How much more confirmation do you need to see from the inflation numbers that prices are sustainably coming back to your 2% target? 

Barkin: Well, we're seeing good progress, as I said, but the data has jumped around. If you look at the October versus the November inflation numbers, for example, they were wildly different. So I'm looking for consistency. I'm looking for breadth. Goods have come down, services have not. So we're looking consistently around our target and a broad-based disinflationary set of results. 

Jennifer: This fall you felt that the economic data was coming in much stronger than anecdotal evidence that you were hearing on the ground in your district. Now as we've seen economic data start to cool in the fourth quarter, do you feel the two are coming more in line now and how does that inform your outlook for the economy next year? 

Barkin: Well, Jennifer, I greatly appreciate you remembering anytime that I got something right. So hopefully you're not going to do the same on the chances where I get something wrong. But I did see we saw 5.2% GDP growth in the third quarter. As you know, I'm on the ground constantly and in our district and I just wasn't hearing that kind of froth. We had a three hundred thirty nine thousand, I think, employment report in September. I wasn't hearing that amount of demand for labor, and I do think the data as it's come in over the last six to seven weeks has been much more in line with what I'm saying, which is, everything's normalizing. Demand is normalizing, employment's normalizing, inflation's normalizing. It's not falling off a cliff, which is good news. It's normalizing, but it's definitely not frothy the way that the data seem to be showing in the third quarter. 

Jennifer: All right, so given all of that, how does that inform your specific view for the policy path going forward? The median projection for three rate cuts next year? Do you fall into that camp? 

Barkin: Well, I'd start by saying, you know, we have 3% PCE inflation, we have 3.7% unemployment, and if you had given me those numbers a year ago, I think I would have taken them. I mean, that's a pretty remarkable change over the last year. Now, we're not yet done with inflation. I'm hopeful the numbers will come down over the coming months. Certainly, the comps will be attractive for the next four months, so I'm expecting inflation to come back down. We'll see what happens to demand. Like I said, I think it's normalizing, not falling off a cliff, but I'm paying close attention to what we're hearing, and I think you do see some segments of the economy, weakening, you know, some of the consumer products, areas where prices have increased, home improvement, apparel, those are segments that feel weak, but we'll see what happens when we get into the new year, and I'm just looking for conviction. I'm looking for conviction that inflation is coming back to target. Looking for conviction that, you know, that's the place to focus as we sort of balance the dual sides of our mandate. 

Jennifer: But do you believe that the Fed does need to cut rates next year as inflation starts to come down and the policy rate becomes more restrictive at that point? 

Barkin: Well, if you're going to assume that inflation comes down nicely, then of we'd respond appropriately. You know, I don't assume what the data's gonna do. We'll see what happens.

Jennifer: To be more specific, can we get any more color around your dot?

Barkin: Well, you know, I don't disclose my particular dot, but I've got a perspective that inflation is a little stubborner than I think the average person in there is in there, and I hope I'm wrong on that. 

Jennifer: Powell told me during the press conference that you guys will need to start cutting rates well before inflation hits 2%, otherwise you will have overshot. As you mentioned, PCE on a core basis, 3.5%. percent you're seeing some more weakness in some of the internal components, as you mentioned. We'll get another read on PCE this Friday. But how much further does inflation need to fall before you would consider cutting rates? 

Barkin: Well, we'll learn a lot over the next several months. If you remember the front half of last year, we had pretty high inflation rates in the back half of last year. We had relatively low inflation reads, and so the first half of next year will tell us a lot of that. If the inflation stays in line with what we've been seeing the last several months, that would be great. If it doesn't, we'll know something else. So I think we're going to learn a lot over the first half of this year. 

Jennifer: Chair Powell also suggested that the focus is shifting back to both components of the dual mandate. You've been so focused on inflation and yes, of course, full employment is always a focus, but perhaps shifting more back to that as well. So I'm curious how much of the policy prescription is to prevent a recession next year? 

Barkin: Well, so you have to go back to where we were, which, you know, go back to the beginning of this year, inflation was quite high. Unemployment was historically low. It's super that we've been able to get through the year with inflation coming down nicely and employment staying historically at very low levels. In my mind, I'm focused on what we learn about what's happening on employment, what's happening on prices. If you want to assume that unemployment starts to move up, of course, that would be an area of focus. If you want to assume that inflation doesn't move down, of course, that would be an area of focus. I think we're nicely positioned now with a 3 percent inflation rate moving down and a 3.7 percent unemployment rate staying relatively steady, but either one of those things could change.

Jennifer: Markets were aggressively pricing in rate cuts ahead of the FOMC meeting. Now the projections have come out and they're pricing even more cuts in than you guys are. What do you make of that? And secondly, the fact that financial conditions have loosened so much, if they were to loosen even further would they that cause you to rethink any of the rate cuts? 

Barkin: Well, I haven't learned much over my six years here. But one of the things I've learned is I don't control markets, and so they're going to do what they're going to do. You know, I might take you back again, to the beginning of last year, there has been an ongoing, I'll call it a difference in perspective between the median on the SEP and the forecast of markets. I think you should look at the record over the last year and see what seems to have paid out. But, you know, everyone's got their forecast, and we'll see who's right. All right. Who blinks first? 

Jennifer: All right. Who blinks first? Tom, we'll have to leave the conversation there. But thank you so much for your insight. Happy holidays to you. Hope to speak with you in the new year. 

Barkin: You too, Jennifer. Thanks.